---
layout: single
title: "Competition / Cooperation"
permalink: /competition-cooperation/
author_profile: false
sidebar:
  nav: "main"
classes: wide
---
<style>
  p {text-align:justify;}
</style>
<p><b>Why?</b>: One key decision that organizers need to make in designing hackathons is how incentives should be structured. Incentives are important not only to motivate participants but also to achieve the goals that organizers aim for. The two common incentive mechanisms are collaboration and competition. Collaboration is suitable for hackathons aiming to establish or deepen connections among participants that can foster longer-term collaboration as it promotes interaction among participants. Competition is suitable for hackathons aiming to create innovations as the competitive pressure is likely to incentivize teams to differentiate themselves from others by generating unique solutions and to put more effort in their projects.</p>
<p><b>Who?</b>: The organizer</p>
<p><b>Outcome Ownership</b>: todo</p>
<p><b>When? and How?</b>: Cooperation in hackathons can be achieved by having dedicated sessions for common activities during the event, e.g., short project presentations, team switching at specified intervals, and common breaks / lunch. Project presentation enables participants to keep updated with each other work and common breaks / lunch facilitate interactions among participants. Team switching might lead to frustration among participants and reduced commitment if they feel they are forced to switch before their work is completed. Hence, this must be done carefully, with attention to participant goals, but can be effective if participants also want to focus on building their personal networks.</p>
<p>Competition is typically designed by awarding monetary and/or non-monetary prizes to the winning teams which are selected by jury and / or popular vote using pre-specified criteria. Prizes can vary greatly, with cash prizes and opportunities for continued development of winning ideas as perhaps the most common. Some hackathons also award projects that meet specific challenges posed by executives / stakeholders. The opportunities for further development can take the form of providing additional resources, freeing up participants time to work on the project post- hackathon, or simply the opportunity to pitch the idea to a top executive. Experts are invited as judges, and winners are typically decided based on predefined criteria such as appeal to market, creativity, originality, and completeness. When choosing competition as an incentive mechanism, organizers need to perform a number of activities before the event which include identifying experts, judging criteria, the audience who will cast the vote and voting method. The popular vote is counted by aggregating votes from the physical event attendees and those from virtual attendees if the final presentation is live streamed or projects are posted on a dedicated online platform with voting feature.</p>
<p><b>Tradeoffs</b>: <ol><li>Product innovation vs Networking: Competition facilitates innovation as teams, under competitive pressure, are likely to generate unique solutions to differentiate themselves from other competing teams and put more effort in their projects. However, competition discourages communication among teams, and hence is not suitable for hackathons aiming to enrich networking among participants beyond their own teams. To address this tradeoff, one, it might be the best to de-emphasize the prizes so that participants do not over emphasize on winning the prizes. Two, official breaks that take place in a common space at specified intervals might also be a great way for a networking opportunity.</li></ol></p>
<p>Further readings</b>: <ol><li>Pe-Than, E.P.P., Nolte, A., Filippova, A., Bird, C., Scallen, S., and Herbsleb, J.D. (2018). Designing Corporate Hackathons with a Purpose. <i>IEEE Software, 36</i>(1), pp. 15-22. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2018.290110547. (<a href="https://eipapa.github.io/hackathon-planning-kit/files/Pethan-IEEESW-2018.pdf">pdf</a>)</li></ol></p>
