---
layout: single
title: "Continuity Planning"
permalink: /continuity-planning/
author_profile: false
sidebar:
  nav: "main"
classes: wide
---
<style>
  p { text-align:justify; }
  li { text-align:justify; }
</style>
<p><b>When?</b>: Continuity planning needs to start prior to the hackathon and continues past the end of the event itself. In order to support the continuity of hackathon outcomes, it is important that the event is embedded into a larger strategy.</p>
<p><b>Who?</b>: To support the continuity of hackathon outcomes it is important for organizers to develop and deploy a suitable strategy. The planning and execution of that strategy needs support by stakeholders and hackathon participants.</p>
<p><b>How?</b>: Before planning for continuity organizers and potential stakeholders need to think about what the outcome of a hackathon should be and how the continuation of this outcome can be supported. Supporting the continuity of e.g., a hackathon project, of connections between hackathon participants and the commitment of participants to continue learning about technologies they had used during a hackathon require different strategies.</p>
<p>Based on this decision hackathon organizers should then to think about how to involve potential stakeholders. Stakeholders are vital for continuity planning since they can e.g., provide background and domain knowledge for hackathon projects, support participants to scope their projects, connect participants to key players after a hackathon has ended and provide access to learning materials just to name a few. It is also important for organizers to set suitable expectations for stakeholders and participants since there is only so much that can be achieved during the short timeframe of a hackathon. This makes it all the more important to plan for what can be done before, during and after an event to support continuation if that should be the organizers’ goal.</p>
<p>Depending on the projected outcome it might be important to connect participants before a hackathon, suggest for them to scope their project before, start working on it, engage with stakeholders or start learning about technologies they might want to use. For stakeholders it is important to provide necessary support before the event e.g., in the form of feedback to project ideas, learning material or access to potential customers, etc.</p>
<p>During a hackathon organizers and stakeholders should provide an environment for participants that fosters the desired outcome. For participants to connect with each other the organizers should put an emphasis on activities that allow for them to not only work on their projects in their teams but also to get in contact with other participants. This could happen in the form of games or other social activities. For participants to develop a project that can be continued afterwards they should encourage participants to e.g., work on a strategy on how to spread the word about their project after the hackathon or to ensure that what they develop can be easily integrated into an existing code base. It might also be advisable to focus participants on developing something that can be prototyped which likely will require participants to follow through with one idea rather than changing it during a hackathon. If the goal is to sustain participants learning e.g., about technologies they used during the hackathon it might be useful to propose follow-up projects or connect them to other individuals that aim to learn about the same technology.</p>
<p>After the hackathon has ended it is important to continue supporting and guiding participants. This support can – depending on the planned outcome – come in the form of startup funding, connecting participants to relevant parties that can support them, help them find resources or simply contacting them from time to time to see what happened and provide targeted support if needed.</p>
<p><b>Tradeoffs</b>: In the following we will discuss strategies to support the continuity of different hackathon outcomes. From the descriptions it should become clear which hackathons can reasonably be achieved together.<br>
  <ul><li>Project continuity: The development of useful artifacts that continue to be developed or that get used after a hackathon is among the most common continuity goals. This requires – as discussed before – a strong focus on the project as such. It is advisable for teams to meet and refine their project idea before the event, validate it with potential stakeholder and then use the hackathon to develop it to a stage that it can be shown to stakeholders. This means that the hackathon essentially serves the purpose of the team focusing on the development of their project with minimal changes to the project idea. It also means that team members choose which aspect of a project they work on predominantly based on their skills and not on what they want to learn about.</li>
  <li>Team continuity: To support team continuity it is important to ensure that participants can stay in touch after a hackathon e.g., through technical means. It might thus be advisable to suggest for them to create a shared Github repository, a shared Slack team, a shared Google Drive folder or something similar that they can already use during the hackathon. It is also important to note that team continuity and project continuity are often mistakenly intertwined. This can lead to issues e.g., when one person in the team attempts to push a project forward while the other team members do not have sufficient time to participate. To foster team continuity, it is thus also important to set common expectations and agree on aspects such as ownership during the hackathon.</li>
  <li>Connection continuity: Similar to team continuity this aspect is also closely linked to creating common technical means of communication and sharing that can already be used during the hackathon. This allows participants to get on board and start sharing while the event is going on. It might also be advisable to create opportunities for participants to engage with each other outside of their projects during and after the hackathon. A shared interest can of course also foster continuous engagement after the hackathon has ended.</li>
  <li>Learning continuity: To foster learning continuity it is not only important to provide means of access to learning material before, during and after an event. It also important to create continuing interest through e.g., challenges during and after the event. Moreover, it is important that individuals choose aspects of a project that they want to work on during their hackathon based on what they want to learn not based on what they already know.</li></ul>
</p>
<p><b>Further readings</b>:
  <ol><li>Pe-Than, E.P.P., Nolte, A., Filippova, A., Bird, C., Scallen, S., and Herbsleb, J.D. (2018). Designing Corporate Hackathons with a Purpose. <i>IEEE Software, 36</i>(1), pp. 15-22. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2018.290110547. (<a href="https://eipapa.github.io/hackathon-planning-kit/files/Pethan-IEEESW-2018.pdf">pdf</a>)</li>
  <li>Nolte, A., Pe-Than, E.P.P., Filippova, A., Bird, C., Scallen, S. & Herbsleb, J.D. (2018). You Hacked and Now What? - Exploring Outcomes of a Corporate Hackathon. <i>Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2</i>, CSCW, 129:1-129:23. (<a href="https://eipapa.github.io/hackathon-planning-kit/files/Nolte-CSCW-2018.pdf">pdf</a>)</li></ol>
</p>
