---
layout: single
title: "Mentoring"
permalink: /mentoring/
author_profile: false
sidebar:
  nav: "main"
classes: wide
---
<style>
  p {text-align:justify;}
  li { text-align:justify; }
</style>

<p><b>When?</b>: It is important to develop a mentoring strategy and recruit mentors prior to the hackathon. Mentoring itself typically takes place either over the entire duration of a hackathon or at specific points during the event. It can also continue after the hackathon has ended.</p>
<p><b>Who?</b>: Mentoring requires the collaboration of organizers, mentors and participants. Organizers create a mentoring strategy, recruit mentors and support them to execute the developed strategy during and after the hackathon. Mentors support participating teams based on the strategy.</p>
<p><b>How?</b>: Mentors are the first point of contact for participating teams during the hackathon. They are thus an integral part of the success of your event and it is important for organizers to develop a mentoring strategy and recruit suitable individuals prior to the hackathon.</p>
<p>Mentoring strategy: The most common strategy is for mentors to provide individual on-demand support during the hackathon based on the mentor’s expertise. In addition, organizers often set specific checkpoints during which mentors engage with teams, ask for their current progress and provide targeted feedback. It is however also possible – in particular during smaller events with few teams – to have dedicated mentors that are assigned to an individual team. Another aspect to consider is forming mentor teams with diverse backgrounds and expertise. This allows them to provide holistic feedback to participating teams. Organizers also have to decide how many mentors to recruit for their hackathon. This decision depends on the number of participating teams, the availability of mentors and other recruitment aspects we will discuss in the following. It also depends on the time of the hackathon since mentor support is mostly needed during the early and late phases of an event.</p>
<p>Recruitment aspects: Depending on the strategy the organizers have to decide on how to recruit suitable mentors. Common aspects for recruitment are the expertise of individuals related to the theme or domain of the event, their technical proficiency related to the technologies that participants might use during a hackathon, their prior hackathon (mentoring) experience and their ability to guide teams and support them to perform to the best of their abilities. It is also important for organizers to think about potential benefits for mentors since they will invest a lot of time and effort into mentoring.</p>
<p><b>After recruiting mentors, it is important for the organizers to discuss with the mentors about when and how they should engage with participating teams. This includes potential activities before the hackathon such as opening webinars as well as their availability during the event either on site or online. In the case that organizers decided for mentoring teams it also important to define those prior to the event.</p>
<p>Mentors need to be introduced to the participants either before or at the beginning of the hackathon. This introduction should include how and when participants can engage with mentors and which mentor can help them with specific topics or issues. If mentors are assigned to specific teams it is important that they do not serve as a team leader but rather provide support when needed but let the participants run their project their way.</p>
<p>How mentors engage with their teams during the hackathon largely depends on the chosen strategy. Mentors typically roam around at the hackathon site and respond to inquiries by participants and provide technical or domain related advice. It is crucial that mentors are accessible to teams when they need them e.g., through technical means like Slack. To ensure that teams take advantage of mentors, organizers can also create checkpoints during which mentors engage with teams rather than teams asking for help. Another important aspect of mentoring commonly is to help participants set expectations and scope their project so that they can reasonably complete it during the short duration of a hackathon.</p>
<p>Mentors will be particularly busy during the early and late phases of the hackathon. During the early phases teams commonly need help scoping their project and technical support to get started. During the late phases everyone is scrambling to fix last minute issues which can also lead to increased mentor demand.</p>
<p>In some cases, mentoring can also continue after the hackathon itself has ended to e.g., complete the development and integration of a technical artifact.</p>
<p><b>Tradeoffs</b>:
  <ol><li>Mentor availability: It is important that mentors are available to teams when they need them. The tight time constraints of a hackathon do not allow for teams to get stuck for long. It is however also important for teams to solve problems on their own. Mentors might be inclined to take over certain aspects of a project to support teams which might give an unfair advantage to those teams especially during a competitive hackathon. Moreover, mentors should be aware that they are typically not only responsible for one team. They thus need to balance their engagement with different teams. One way of achieving a suitable balance this is to create mandatory checkpoints during which mentors are available for each team and to have additional asynchronous communication channels such as Slack for teams to reach mentors when they have a specific need. The latter part is particularly important when mentors are only available online.</li>
  <li>Team mentor vs free flowing mentors: Free flowing mentors can quickly address the needs of any team in need while team mentors can build a relationship with a team and be more effective and efficient supporting them. Supplying a larger hackathon with individual team mentors can however prove to be challenging. Moreover, being embedded as a team mentor can lead to them taking over the project from the participants which is not desirable because it negatively affects their experience and it can be unfair to other teams especially during a competitive hackathon.</li>
  <li>Mentor teams vs individual mentors: The advantage of mentoring teams is that participants can get comprehensive support related to multiple aspects of their project (domain, technical advice, scoping, etc.). They are thus particularly useful when using checkpoints because these allow for mentors to take time to address multiple potential issues the team is facing at the same time. The advantage of mentoring teams however only materializes when the mentors in a team have different expertise. Individual mentors on the other hand can flexibly offer targeted advice for teams in need. This does however require teams to know who they should address for specific topics. Individual mentoring also makes better use of each individual mentor’s time.</li>
  <li>Mentor background: Each mentor should at best be a domain expert with years of technical experience in the field, lots of hackathons under her/his belt and the ability to solve any problem a team might have. Since this is not possible it is important that not only participants but also the mentors are aware of the skills of other mentors to be able to refer participants to suitable mentors if needed. Mentoring teams can mitigate this issue if they are formed as discussed before.</li>
  <li>Participant to mentor ratio: At first glance it appears that more mentors are always better since more mentors can support more teams. This is however not true in all circumstances since e.g., having many mentors that can help with domain related questions and none that can help with technical problems is not desirable. Moreover, more mentors create more organizational overhead for organizers and might result in conflicting messages to participants since different mentors might provide different advice to teams based on their personal experience and background. The more important questions organizers might want to ask themselves is which expertise might be required by participating teams at different points during a hackathon. At the beginning of an event participants will mostly require help related to scoping their project while later the required support will shift stronger towards domain and technology related questions. When deciding for mentors it is thus important to consider which expertise needs to be available to participants at which point during an event. Moreover, mentoring can also be streamlined by using the previously discussed checkpoints.</li>
  <li>Strict guidance vs mentors decide how to engage: Each hackathon is slightly different with different goals, organizers, participants and mentoring requirements. Some organizers thus might want to provide overly strict advice to mentors related to how they should engage with their teams and when. Other organizers might just let mentors engage with teams at any point in any way they want. Both approaches are not feasible. Providing strict guidance would limit the ability – in particular of experienced mentors – to provide useful support. Providing no guidance might affect the overall structure of the hackathon. A hackathon is an intensive event during which a lot of things happen over a short period of time and mentors are crucial for an event to be successful. Spreading information about who is responsible for and knowledgeable about which topic and setting fixed checkpoints to reel everyone back in can thus help to mitigate this tradeoff.</li>
  <li>Skin in the game: Mentors need a motivation to participate in a hackathon since unlike teams they typically cannot win anything. It thus appears reasonable to e.g., let them propose problems or ideas that participants can solve as an incentive. This might however lead to a conflict of interest since mentors might want to focus on teams that work on the problem they proposed, and mentors might even feel inclined to take over a project they are invested in. There are multiple ways for organizers to address this issue. They can e.g., create mixed mentor teams, ask mentors to suggest problem areas that leave the specific solution open or assign mentors to teams that do not tackle the problems they proposed. At the end it should be clear that the participants decide on what they want to do and how they want to do it. Mentors are just there to support. Not to run the show.</li></ol></p>
<p><b>Further readings</b>:
  <ol><li>Nolte, A., Hayden, L. B., & Herbsleb, J. D. (2020). How to Support Newcomers in Scientific Hackathons - An Action Research Study on Expert Mentoring. <i>Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 4</i>, CSCW1, Article 25 (May 2020), 23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/33928301.</li></ol></p>
